We were presented some evidence, um,
it's several weeks ago around this.
I've got questions, um, sues far away.
Um, I actually agree with this in principle.
I think that's fair enough.
But I, there's some bits that I find confusing, right?
That like when they say, I don't think we can say products
must be GMO free because they will use
Sort Bell. A lot of them would,
What is the story with the GMO stuff?
'cause a lot of them would be made with
imported ingredients.
They are. Yeah. So, and they would have GMOs.
Any stuff is gmo. Yeah. So I just can't,
A lot of the board related stuff is where's the GMO stuff?
Um, and the written submission to support
Morning. Welcome
to Primary Production Select committee, which, um,
we'll leave it in your hands.
You we're here to talk about the, um, labeling. Yeah.
So, um, looks like that. We'll leave it with you, Vincent.
Thank you. Uh, good morning.
Um, committee, um, I've got Fiona Duncan with me, Carter,
uh, expert in this field.
Um, thank you. The opportunity to speak to the committee.
Um, we, look, we totally understand the concerns of vegans
and vegetarians that, um, particularly
around misleading claims, you know, that, that, that,
that is a issue and acknowledge, acknowledge that.
However, the, the labeling regime in New Zealand
and Australia, it's a joint joint scheme.
Uh, it's, it's intended to be, um, a minimum
labeling requirements,
a mandatory minimum labeling requirement.
It, it exists primarily for public health reasons.
And, and, and to reduce the risk
of food born foodborne illness,
it focuses on three main areas.
So, uh, allergens, uh, ingredients
and nutritional information.
So it's a set of mandatory requirements.
It doesn't include other areas like, um, vegan
or vegetarian preferences.
It's anchored in international standards.
So it's, it's not, it doesn't, it, it reflects
what most countries in the world, uh, would apply.
Very common, uh, but indexed to a Codex rules.
Uh, as far as we can tell, there's no country in the world
that has, uh, sort of system
that is being requested in the petition.
There are countries where there are stronger private,
uh, standards emerging.
And, uh, Switzerland's a good example
of a thing called a v label, which is,
you know, getting some traction.
Uh, and that may well be a, you know, way forward for this,
uh, this, this group is to get more traction
of private standards.
Um, so we're very happy to answer any
Questions. So I'll
go first.
Uh, isn't there other pieces of legislation that cover, um,
uh, uh, claims made on labels? Yes,
Absolutely. Fair, fair Trading
Act is the obvious area.
So if there's a misleading claim
and it's, it's, uh, clearly un un truthful
or misleading, uh, there is an avenue to make a complaint
through the Fair Trading Act. Yeah,
Steve, so there is crossover between
allergy and health risk
and establishment
of whether something's got dairy
products in it, for example.
Hmm. Um, so there's a example given in the supplementary of,
uh, coconut latte with milk solids,
got milk solids on it, framing to be plant-based, isn't it?
Both a combination of a preferential option
and also in some instances, a, uh, a health
option for us to have a clear definition of
what is vegan and vegetarian.
And is that not what British legislation does?
And couldn't we be doing a similar thing here?
The, I mean, ultimately you've got an, a requirement
to disclose ingredients, uh, disclose requirement
to disclose allergens.
Yeah. Um, and that, you know, that discloses for,
for consumers the information, the core information,
and what's in the product itself.
That's back of pack requirements.
You know, what we, you know, we do see in your referring
to is some front of pack, you know, marketing claims
that can be potentially misleading or,
or gloss over content that is disclosed
or required to be disclosed in the back of
Pack. Doesn't that prove
that, um, for a lack
of a clear definition,
there are misleading claims being made.
And surely the solution to that is a clear definition of
what is vegan or what can claim to be vegan or vegetarian
or plant-based for the benefit
of both industry and consumers.
And why would we not want to do that,
to clarify a definition?
'cause other jurisdictions, such as the UK have done that.
We're not saying it's not a helpful thing.
Uh, and often those things start as private standards.
Uh, and when there's, you know, sufficient consumer demand,
they can move to government back standards.
That's all we've got Now. We've got
private standards for a long time.
Yes. And it's not, not working.
So that, that's this, this petition is specifically asking
for there to be a government standard.
And other, other jurisdictions have done that.
And they've even said a, a total cut
and paste of what the UK legislation has would
solve the problem here.
And is that a problem for
Us? It is, it is
possible. I mean,
the joint standard is a dynamic standard.
So, um, proposals can be requested
and, um, amendments can be requested.
So anyone's free to bring that to,
to the joint food standard system.
Right. And requested, you know, at the, at the moment, um,
that's not on the roadmap
of priorities, but would we, but it's possible. Would,
Could we do that?
Uh, look, anyone can do that. You could, would be
A request from our committee that you do
That we'll move to, um,
mark Cameron's got a question, Steve, sorry,
Very quickly. Thanks for
the official, sorry, I'm online in hospital, but,
but could you answer the fact what do you think the level
of consumer demand is for that?
Because Steve raises a good point,
but if there's not enough consumer de demand to warrant, uh,
government intervention into, um, now how we regulate
what is, what is vegetarian and or vegan
or not, um, it starts from, as you say, um,
the, the constituents.
So are you getting a lot
of feedback from the constituents saying they want this,
Uh, look. Um,
we don't have any sort of accurate picture of the sort
of size of the vegan, uh, consumer population.
Um, but I would say it doesn't it, apart from the groups
who are very strongly, uh, you know, concerned about it, we,
we don't see it as being a, a regular occurring request
for consumers in a wide sense.
So it's not coming through
and it's certainly not coming through from industry.
So industry are not seeing sufficient demand
to bring two regulators a request for this. Yeah.
So do you have any idea of what sort of,
um, raise penalty regime is there for those that are,
um, claiming to be vegan or vegetarian,
but it's proved to be not.
And has there been any prosecutions,
Breaches to be training?
Yes. There'll be a Commerce Commission Fair
Trading Act matter.
We don't, you don't visibility on that.
We don't, uh, prosecute those matters. Yeah. Yeah.
That'd be interesting because maybe if they,
there is a few more prosecutions people might
be a bit more careful about. But I think the,
The part of the change is even for enforcement of the,
of the Fair Trading Act is a definition.
So a definition would help
enforcement of the Fair Trading Act.
But you know, it's like all they're asking
for is give us a definition
and then, then that helps both, um,
companies producing food products to make safe claims.
And it helps consumers knowing that the,
that if there's a claim being made,
it has made a very specific definition.
So if I'm under to understand correctly, if we did that,
it would have to be agreed to by Australia as well
because we've got Absolutely, we've got joint
It would, it would need to be raised as a proposal.
It would need to be considered, it would need to have joint
ministerial support.
Um, yeah. And,
and frankly we just don't see the,
the demand apart from groups
who are strongly advocating it, such as the, the,
The implication of that is that a minority group doesn't
have have a right to, uh, a clear definition of well,
They've got a right to request one
and so far it's not being requested.
Yeah. So I think to your point though, in terms
of the soy, the latte, that
that's actually a Fair Trading Act issue, isn't it?
Because they're claiming, 'cause everybody there is kind
of a definition of vegetarian
and there's a definition of vegan that
Yeah, but it's not, but the, the only recourse
Milk solids to list milk solids in the ingredients.
Yeah. Which is one of the criteria that you talked about.
Yeah. Then they're actually breaching the Fair Trading Act,
But the only recourse for the customer is
to take a, a Fair Trading Act,
But also if they haven't labeled,
That's the same with everything.
That's, that, that means you anyway,
you've got a high expectation of people to take the,
and just simplify the whole process.
Right. But vin
Right. We'll, um,
move on because the bells are running.
Hey, thank you very much. Um, that was quite insightful,
But it was listed in the ingredients, wasn't it?
Wrong? Deliberates are more,
I think on this. Yeah. Thank you. We
Thank you very much. You,
We have to do, uh, move deliberations next and leaking,
but, and we will, we'll quits for the day.
We haven't got a one o'clock call today. So are we.